<html>
<head>
<title>YST 2019</title>
</head>

<body bgcolor = "silver">

YOUNG SCIENTISTS TANZANIA PROJECT REPORT 2019
JOSEPH ISAAC MASANGULA AND VICENT GABRIEL LAIZER
KISIMIRI SECONDARY SCHOOL ARUSHA TANZANIA
P.O BOX 14480, MERU ARUSHA
 

 


 



CHAPTER 1: INTRODUCTION
People are not aware about disposable diapers, Tanzania and the world at large has become a dump of used diapers and most of them are not recycled and thus they pollute the environment and raise the risk of various diseases like cholera and others. The number of users of diapers in most of the countries in the world is high and they dump them universally in the environment without being aware of the effects that might occur. It is estimated that more than 2 million diapers are used per day in Tanzania(NBS 2017) and only 1000 diapers are placed in a manner that may not cause effects to the living organisms equals to 0.05% of the daily consumption, this is due to the fact that the cost of this diapers is low costs only 500 TSH. Many people from different areas both rural and urban afford to buy diapers for their children.
One among the sensitive areas affected by plastic wastes especially diapers in Tanzania is Arusha city, due to the presence of a high population (416,442), diapers in the streets are so many which creates the risk of various diseases to the people and other living organisms, and due to the presence of nucleated settlement the municipal authority fails to collect wastes from streets thus the area are very dirty full of diapers, streets like Ungalimited, Ngarenaro, Tengeru, Maji ya chai, Ngarenanyuki, Usa river, Momella as well as Kisimiri where our school is located.


1.1	PURPOSE OF THE STUDY
The purpose is to reduce and finally make an end to the diapers dumped in streets and to come up with an alternative solution to these diapers through recycling to getting fine products that can help to facilitate agriculture, fighting the effects of floods, manufacturing of self curing concrete, fire fighting as well as waste management and create a better living environment than it is now that could make people benefit from diapers instead of being harmed.


 
Image 01: Example of dumps in Tanzania containing a large amount of diapers.







CHAPTER 2: METHODOLOGY
2.1: THE STUDY LOCATION
	The study was carried out in Kisimiri village which is administratively found in Arumeru district, Arumeru district is located in longitude 36.2630846 and latitude -2.7583634.
2.2: MATERIALS AND METHODS
	To make this project successful number of approaches and methodology were applied for data collection which included, field observation, key informant interview and number of experiments in the laboratory which finally gave us the solutions to the problem.
2.2.1: KEY INFORMANT INTERVIEW
	The interviews about the problem was done in three different areas, first, we visited The Nelson Mandela Institute of Science and Technology and met two professors, professor Muzuka A, and Miss Kimario and interviewed them about how compounds found in diapers can be useful if recycled, secondly, we interviewed the officers of the National bureau of statistics and third, district councilor and interviewed specialists who have done researches on the areas.


The aim was to address the following issues:
•	The number of people in Arusha 
•	The number of diapers used per day 
•	The number of collected diapers per day 
•	The amount of waste found in Arusha 
•	Number of dumps in Arusha 
2.2.2: QUESTIONAIRE 
	Different questions were asked to people in the area of Kisimiri village and other nearby places as to why they tend to dump diapers in streets without placing them in a proper way that cannot bring effects to the living organisms.
The table below shows the answers.
CODE	1	2	3
NUMBER	32	78	11

CODE	MEANING
1	Poor education on waste management
2	No other means of waste management
3	We don’t know


2.2.3: FIELD OBSERVATION
	We visited places in Kisimiri, Ngarenanyuki, Usa river and Momella and observed large open dumps full of diapers, streets contain diapers, people’s farms, construction sites, area affected by floods, areas affected by fire accidents and think if diapers can help to solve these challenges.

2.3: LABORATORY SAMPLING AND ANALYSIS
2.3.1: LABORATORY IDENTIFICATION OF COMPOUNDS 
Below are some of the components found in diapers;
1.	Sodium Polyacrylate
During the laboratory test the compound sodium polyacrylate was present, 
Sodium polycarbonate is a super absorbent chemical compound that is used in the fillers of many disposable diapers. It is composed of cellulose processed from trees that is mixed with crystals of polyacrylate. This chemical absorbs fluids and creates surface tension in the lining of the diaper to bind fluids and prevent leakage.  
  
Picture 02: Sodium polyacrylate in gel form during laboratory test.
2.	Dioxins
The experiment done in laboratory, the chemical compound Dioxins was present.
Most disposable diapers are bleached white with chlorine, resulting in a byproduct that leaches into the environment and the diapers.

3.	Volatile Organic Compounds (VOCs)
Also, diapers contain chemicals called volatile organic compounds (VOCs). These include chemicals such as ethylbenzene, toluene, xylene and dipentene. According to the EPA, VOCs can cause eye, nose and throat irritation, headaches, damage to the liver, kidney and central nervous system. 
4.	Other chemicals                                                                           we also observed the presence of other compounds, these include dyes, fragrances and plastics. Adhesive chemicals are used in the sticky tabs to close the diapers and dyes are used to color and make the patterns and labels that mark diapers. Perfumes and fragrances are used in some disposable diapers to help mask odors

2.4: LIMITATIONS OF OUR PROJECT
	Through this project there could have been maximum benefit to the society but there still are some limitations.
The habit of dumping diapers cannot be escaped easily since people do not have enough education on the effects of dumping diapers to the environment. It is difficult to change the minds of the people but through this project education about the effects of disposable diapers to the society will be spread to all people. 
The table below shows the number of disposed diapers per year in Tanzania since 2016 to 2018
Year	2016	2017	2018
Number 	789,654	954,864	1,475,623
               Figure: showing the annual increase of the number of diapers disposed in the country
CHAPTER 3.0: RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
3.1: SUGGESTED SOLUTIONS TO THE PROBLEM
	In every disposal area we suggest to have an enclosed container (the diaper bank) that will be special for holding diapers instead of dumping them openly, this enclosed container will help in the collection of diapers to be recycled and preventing the effects that might be caused when dumping diapers openly.
3.2: SIGNIFICANCE OF THE PROJECT
This project is of great importance in all aspects of life since it will help the villagers and Tanzanians at large.
On dedicating this to economic aspects, we are looking forward to increase production as diapers can help in improving agricultural production which gives the assurance of zero hunger in Tanzania and the world at large.
  
Picture 2: showing the affectivity of sodium polyacrylate when applied in agriculture.
Socially, it will provide the assurance of free from the risk of various diseases which may kill people; this will be done through collection of diapers which contain feces from the environment.
 It also ensures that floods and fire accidents give no effect to the society, since sodium polyacrylate is highly non-flammable.
  
Picture 3: Showing the fire proof ability of sodium polyacrylate. It can be useful to people by creating fire proof materials.
Also it will help in saving money, instead of using high amount of water in construction we can use diapers that can help in manufacturing of self curing concrete.
The project will also help in creating the sense of awareness among the people concerning the use of diapers in other useful ways. Through this project people will become aware on how diapers can be beneficial in economic and social well being. This will lead to environmental conservation and make the world a better place to live.


CHAPTER 4
4.1:  CONCLUSION
Based on the findings of the study it can be concluded that;
•	Sodium polyacrylate is present in diapers as a major component
•	Sodium polyacrylate has a great ability to hold water without being dissolved
•	Sodium polyacrylate is a fire proof material
•	Factors leading to poor dumping of diapers is lack of proper waste management systems in rural and urban areas
•	Recycling diapers saves the environment
4.2: RECOMENDATION
	After the accomplishment of this project, we recommend that, better means of disposing diapers and all wastes produced in our country, this can be done through the following methods;
•	The government should buy trash trucks that will be collecting wastes from home to home in every street
•	Providing education to the people on how to group waste products mainly into biodegradable and non biodegradable wastes.
•	Setting a special diaper (and related wastes) collection system from other non biodegradable wastes so that they can be used for this project.
•	Strict laws should be made and implemented effectively to protect the environment from poor waste management 











ACKNOWLEDGEMENT
	We are grateful acknowledging the inputs of professor Muzuka A, and Miss Kimario T, from nelson Mandela institute of science and technology for their assistance during laboratory extraction and analysis, specialists and officers of Meru district council and national bureau of statistics respectively, the school head master of Kisimiri secondary school Mr. valentine Tarimo and the supervisor of our project Mr. Peter Emmanuel and the students of Kisimiri secondary school.















REFERENCES.
UNICEF AND WORLD BANK http://documents.worldbank.org/curated/en/455821468000919135/pdf/96442-BRI-CHILD-FECES-Box391444B-PUBLIC-WSP-Tanzania-CFD-Profile.pdf
World Health Organization, 2010, a study published in the "Archives of Environmental Health" in 1999
National bureau of statistics [Tanzania]      
https://knoema.com/TANPOP2006/population-projection-of-tanzania-2006                                  
Wikipedia documentaries
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Diaper
















CONTACT INFORMATION
Joseph I Masangula
Mobile: 0743688479
Email: josephmasangula2@gmail.com
Vicent G Laizer
Mobile: 0744362609
Email: laizercorp@gmail.com
Prof Alfred Muzuka
Mobile: 0787272834
Email: Alfred.muzuka@nm-aist.ac.tz
Mr. Emmanuel Peter
Mobile:
Email:

</body>
</html>
